S/MIME docs (#578)
mautic/user-documentation: docs/configuration/smime_email_signing.rst

S/MIME Email signing
####################

S/MIME - Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions - is a standard for public key encryption and signing of Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions - MIME - data. Mautic supports S/MIME Email signing to help verify the authenticity of your Emails and ensure that the Email content wasn't modified in transit.

.. note::
    S/MIME signing is currently only available when using the SMTP Email transport. It doesn't work with API-based Email transports.

> What's S/MIME Email signing?
> ****************************

Reviewer: Let's wrap this with vale statements

```suggestion
.. vale off

What's S/MIME Email signing?
****************************

.. vale on
```

.. vale off

> S/MIME email signing

Reviewer: There are a couple of things here:

- The word "MIME" can be added to the `accept.txt` file, located at `.github/styles/config/vocabularies/Mautic/accept.txt`

- Capitalize "email"

```suggestion
S/MIME Email signing
```

####################

.. vale on

S/MIME - Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions - is a standard for public key encryption and signing of Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions - MIME - data. Mautic supports S/MIME Email signing to help verify the authenticity of your Emails and ensure that the Email content wasn't modified in transit.

.. note::
    S/MIME signing is currently only available when using the SMTP Email transport. It doesn't work with API-based Email transports.

> What's S/MIME email signing?

Reviewer: Same here for capitalization.

```suggestion
What's S/MIME Email signing?
```

.. warning::
    Make sure you're using the SMTP Email transport before turning on S/MIME signing. The feature doesn't work with API-based Email transports.

Configuration
=============

Add the following configuration parameters to your ``app/config/local.php`` file:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $parameters = array(
        // ... other configuration ...
        'smime_signing_enabled' => true,
        'smime_certificates_path' => '%kernel.project_dir%/var/smime_certificates',
    );

Configuration parameters
------------------------

``smime_signing_enabled``
    set to ``true`` to turn on S/MIME Email signing or ``false`` to turn it off.
    
    Default: ``false``

``smime_certificates_path``
    the absolute path to the directory where Mautic stores your S/MIME certificates. You can use ``%kernel.project_dir%`` to reference your Mautic installation directory.
    
    Default: ``%kernel.project_dir%/var/smime_certificates``

Generating S/MIME certificates
*******************************

Each Email address that sends Emails from Mautic needs its own pair of certificates:

- A **public certificate** (`.crt` file) that verifies your identity

> - A **private key** (`.pem` file) that signs the Emails

Reviewer: I think file types can be inline codes.

```suggestion
- A **public certificate** (``.crt`` file) that verifies your identity
- A **private key** (``.pem`` file) that signs the Emails
```

- Private key: ``email@example.com.pem`` - plain text - or ``email@example.com.pem.enc`` - encrypted

Replace ``email@example.com`` with the actual sender Email address.

.. important::
    The Email address in the filename must exactly match the **From** address used when sending Emails.

Certificate directory structure
================================

Place your certificate files in the directory specified by ``smime_certificates_path``:

.. code-block:: text

    /var/smime_certificates/
    ├── admin@example.com.crt
    ├── admin@example.com.pem
    ├── support@example.com.crt
    └── support@example.com.pem

Setting permissions
===================

Ensure that the web server user has read access to the certificate directory and files:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Set ownership (replace www-data with your web server user)
    chown -R www-data:www-data /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates
    
    # Set directory permissions
    chmod 755 /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates
    
    # Set certificate permissions
    chmod 644 /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates/*.crt
    chmod 600 /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates/*.pem

.. warning::

>     Private keys (`.pem` files) should have restrictive permissions (``600``) to prevent unauthorized access.

Reviewer: Add backticks for inline code:

```suggestion
    Private keys (``.pem`` files) should have restrictive permissions (``600``) to prevent unauthorized access.
```

    file_put_contents('var/smime_certificates/sender@example.com.pem.enc', \$helper->encrypt(\$key));
    "

3. After creating the encrypted version, you can remove the plain text ``.pem`` file for security
4. Mautic automatically uses the encrypted version - ``.pem.enc`` - if it exists

Key priority
============

When looking for a private key, Mautic checks in this order:

1. Encrypted key: ``email@example.com.pem.enc``
2. Plain text key: ``email@example.com.pem``

If both exist, the encrypted version takes priority.

Testing S/MIME signing
**********************

After configuring S/MIME signing:

1. Send a test Email from Mautic using an Email address that has certificates configured
2. Select the Email source/headers in your Email client
3. Look for these indicators that Mautic signed the Email:

   - Content-Type header contains ``multipart/signed``
   - An attachment named ``smime.p7s``
   - protocol ``application/x-pkcs7-signature``

4. If your Email client supports S/MIME, you should see a verification indicator - such as a seal or checkmark

Troubleshooting S/MIME
***********************

Emails aren't signed

> =====================

Reviewer: Let's remove excess punctuations for the titles here

```suggestion
Troubleshooting S/MIME
**********************

Emails aren't signed
====================
```

If Mautic doesn't sign Emails, select:

1. **S/MIME enabled** - verify ``smime_signing_enabled`` sets to ``true`` in ``local.php``
2. **Using SMTP transport** - S/MIME only works with SMTP. Select your Email transport settings
3. **Certificates exist** - confirm the ``.crt`` and ``.pem`` files exist in the certificates directory
4. **Correct filenames** - certificate filenames must exactly match the sender Email address
5. **File permissions** - the web server User must have read access to the certificate files
6. **Select logs** - look in ``var/logs/mautic_prod.log`` for any S/MIME-related errors

Certificates not found errors

> ==============================

Reviewer: Same here for excess punctuation

```suggestion
Certificates not found errors
=============================
```

If you see certificate errors in the logs:

1. Verify the ``smime_certificates_path`` specifies correctly in your configuration

> 2. Select that Mautic names certificate files correctly - ``email@example.com.crt`` and ``.pem``

Reviewer: @escopecz I only want to make sure of this part as it's not clear. Does this mean as below?

```suggestion
2. Ensure that Mautic names certificate files correctly - ``email@example.com.crt`` and ``.pem``
```

Other than this, this PR is good to go! 🚀

3. Ensure the Email address in the filename exactly matches the From address
4. Verify file permissions allow the web server User to read the files

Certificate validation errors

> ==============================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certificate validation errors
=============================
```

If recipients Reports certificate validation errors:

1. **Self-signed certificates** - these aren't trusted by default. Recipients need to manually trust them
2. **Expired certificates** - select your certificate expiration dates
3. **Certificate chain** - ensure you're using the full certificate chain from your Certificate Authority
4. **Domain mismatch** - the certificate's Email address must match the From address

Performance considerations

> ===========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Performance considerations
==========================
```

S/MIME email signing

> ###################

Reviewer: Let's remove excess spaces, add a punctuation to cover the length of the title and capitalize "Email".

```suggestion
S/MIME Email signing
####################
```

S/MIME - Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions - is a standard for public key encryption and signing of Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions - MIME - data. Mautic supports S/MIME Email signing to help verify the authenticity of your Emails and ensure that the Email content wasn't modified in transit.

.. note::
    S/MIME signing is currently only available when using the SMTP Email transport. It doesn't work with API-based Email transports.

What is S/MIME email signing?

> *****************************

Reviewer: Let's:

- Remove the excess spaces
- Capitalize "Email"
- Change "what is" to "what's"
- Adjust the title punctuations

```suggestion
What's S/MIME Email signing?
****************************
```

Turn on S/MIME signing
**********************

Turn on S/MIME signing through your Mautic configuration file. It isn't available in the web interface.

.. warning::
    Make sure you're using the SMTP Email transport before turning on S/MIME signing. The feature doesn't work with API-based Email transports.

Configuration
=============

Add the following configuration parameters to your ``app/config/local.php`` file:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $parameters = array(
        // ... other configuration ...
        'smime_signing_enabled' => true,
        'smime_certificates_path' => '%kernel.project_dir%/var/smime_certificates',
    );

Configuration parameters
------------------------

``smime_signing_enabled``
    set to ``true`` to turn on S/MIME Email signing or ``false`` to turn it off.
    
    Default: ``false``

``smime_certificates_path``
    the absolute path to the directory where Mautic stores your S/MIME certificates. You can use ``%kernel.project_dir%`` to reference your Mautic installation directory.
    
    Default: ``%kernel.project_dir%/var/smime_certificates``

Generating S/MIME certificates

> *******************************

Reviewer: Let's remove excess punctuations here.

```suggestion
Generating S/MIME certificates
******************************
```

Each Email address that sends Emails from Mautic needs its own pair of certificates:

- A **public certificate** (``.crt`` file) that verifies your identity

> - A **private key** (``.pem`` file) that signs the Emails

Reviewer: Maybe we can use dash here instead of parantheses.

```suggestion
- A **public certificate** - ``.crt`` file - that verifies your identity
- A **private key** - ``.pem`` file - that signs the Emails
```

Self-signed certificates

> =========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Self-signed certificates
========================
```

For testing purposes, you can create self-signed certificates. However, for production use, you should obtain certificates from a trusted Certificate Authority.

To create a self-signed certificate and private key:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Create a private key and certificate signing request
    openssl req -newkey rsa:4096 -nodes -keyout sender@example.com.pem -out sender@example.com.csr
    
    # Create a self-signed certificate valid for 1 year
    openssl x509 -req -days 365 -in sender@example.com.csr -signkey sender@example.com.pem -out sender@example.com.crt

.. important::
    Replace ``sender@example.com`` with the actual Email address you're using to send Emails from Mautic.

Production certificates
=======================

For production use, obtain S/MIME certificates from a trusted Certificate Authority - CA. Many Certificate Authorities offer S/MIME certificates, and the process typically involves:

> 1. Generating a Certificate Signing Request - CSR

Reviewer: I think we can list CSR in `accept.txt`.

Author: Done

2. Submitting the CSR to the CA along with identity verification documents
3. Receiving the signed certificate from the CA

For detailed instructions on obtaining production certificates, see the :xref:`SparkPost S/MIME Technical Guide`.

Installing certificates

> ************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Installing certificates
***********************
```

Certificate file naming
=======================

Name certificates according to the Email address they're for:

- Public certificate: ``email@example.com.crt``
- Private key: ``email@example.com.pem`` - plain text - or ``email@example.com.pem.enc`` - encrypted

Replace ``email@example.com`` with the actual sender Email address.

.. important::
    The Email address in the filename must exactly match the **From** address used when sending Emails.

Certificate directory structure

> ================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Certificate directory structure
===============================
```

Place your certificate files in the directory specified by ``smime_certificates_path``:

.. code-block:: text

    /var/smime_certificates/
    ├── admin@example.com.crt
    ├── admin@example.com.pem
    ├── support@example.com.crt
    └── support@example.com.pem

Setting permissions
===================

Ensure that the web server User has read access to the certificate directory and files:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Set ownership (replace www-data with your web server user)
    chown -R www-data:www-data /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates
    
    # Set directory permissions
    chmod 755 /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates
    
    # Set certificate permissions
    chmod 644 /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates/*.crt
    chmod 600 /path/to/mautic/var/smime_certificates/*.pem

.. warning::

>     Private keys (``.pem`` files) should have restrictive permissions (``600``) to prevent unauthorized access.

Reviewer: Let's use dash here instead of parantheses.

```suggestion
    Private keys - ``.pem`` files - should have restrictive permissions - ``600`` - to prevent unauthorized access.
```

Encrypting private keys

> ************************

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Encrypting private keys
***********************
```

> For enhanced security, you can encrypt your private keys using Mautic's encryption system. Encrypted private keys are stored with the ``.pem.enc`` extension.

Reviewer: Would this active voice work here?

```suggestion
To enhance security, you can encrypt your private keys using Mautic's encryption system. Mautic stores the encrypted private keys with the ``.pem.enc`` extension.
```

Benefits of encryption
======================

Encrypting private keys adds an extra layer of security:

- If someone compromises your server, they can't use the encrypted keys without Mautic's secret key
- The encryption uses your Mautic instance's ``secret_key`` from the configuration
- Mautic automatically decrypts the keys when needed to sign Emails

.. important::
    Make sure you have a ``secret_key`` configured in your ``app/config/local.php`` file. Mautic creates this automatically during installation.

Creating encrypted keys

> ========================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating encrypted keys
=======================
```

    );
    \$key = file_get_contents('var/smime_certificates/sender@example.com.pem');
    file_put_contents('var/smime_certificates/sender@example.com.pem.enc', \$helper->encrypt(\$key));
    "

3. After creating the encrypted version, you can remove the plain text ``.pem`` file for security
4. Mautic automatically uses the encrypted version - ``.pem.enc`` - if it exists

Key priority
============

When looking for a private key, Mautic checks in this order:

1. Encrypted key: ``email@example.com.pem.enc``
2. Plain text key: ``email@example.com.pem``

If both exist, the encrypted version takes priority.

Testing S/MIME signing
**********************

After configuring S/MIME signing:

1. Send a test Email from Mautic using an Email address that has certificates configured
2. Select the Email source/headers in your Email client
3. Look for these indicators that Mautic signed the Email:

   - Content-Type header contains ``multipart/signed``
   - An attachment named ``smime.p7s``
   - protocol ``application/x-pkcs7-signature``

4. If your Email client supports S/MIME, you should see a verification indicator - such as a seal or checkmark

> 
> Troubleshooting S/MIME

Reviewer: Let's remove an extra space here.

```suggestion

Troubleshooting S/MIME
```

**********************

Emails aren't signed
====================

If Mautic doesn't sign Emails, select:

1. **S/MIME enabled** - verify ``smime_signing_enabled`` sets to ``true`` in ``local.php``
2. **Using SMTP transport** - S/MIME only works with SMTP. Select your Email transport settings
3. **Certificates exist** - confirm the ``.crt`` and ``.pem`` files exist in the certificates directory
4. **Correct filenames** - certificate filenames must exactly match the sender Email address
5. **File permissions** - the web server User must have read access to the certificate files
6. **Select logs** - look in ``var/logs/mautic_prod.log`` for any S/MIME-related errors

> 
> Certificates not found errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Certificates not found errors
```

=============================

If you see certificate errors in the logs:

1. Verify the ``smime_certificates_path`` specifies correctly in your configuration
2. Select that Mautic names certificate files correctly - ``email@example.com.crt`` and ``.pem``
3. Ensure the Email address in the filename exactly matches the From address
4. Verify file permissions allow the web server User to read the files

> 
> Certificate validation errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Certificate validation errors
```

=============================

If recipients Reports certificate validation errors:

1. **Self-signed certificates** - these aren't trusted by default. Recipients need to manually trust them
2. **Expired certificates** - select your certificate expiration dates
3. **Certificate chain** - ensure you're using the full certificate chain from your Certificate Authority
4. **Domain mismatch** - the certificate's Email address must match the From address

> 
> Performance considerations

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Performance considerations
```
